deployment/hetzner_cloud/README.md, before:

# Migration
[Migration from 2.2.0 to 2.2.1](migration/2_2_0-2_2_1/README.md)

# Setup on Hetzner Cloud Server
Suggested OS:
Debian 12

For Hetzner Cloud Server a cloud config can be attached, which will be run before first start
https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/basic-cloud-config/de
https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/examples.html
You can use our [cloudConfig.yaml](./cloudConfig.yaml) but you must insert you own ssh public key, 
like this:
```yaml  
ssh_authorized_keys:
  - ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIAkLGbzbG7KIGfkssKJBkc/0EVAzQ/8vjvVHzNdxhK8J yourname
```

I made a (german) video to show it to you (video is older, cloudConfig.yaml differ):

[![Video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/fORK3Bt3lPw/hqdefault.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fORK3Bt3lPw)

## After Setup Cloud Server with cloudConfig.yaml
### setup your domain pointing on server ip address 
### login to your new server as root
```bash
ssh -i /path/to/privKey root@gddhost.tld
```

### Change default shell

```bash
chsh -s /bin/bash
chsh -s /bin/bash gradido
```

### Set password for user `gradido`

```bash
$ passwd gradido
# enter new password twice
```

### Switch to the new user

```bash
su gradido
```

### Test authentication via SSH

If you logout from the server you can test authentication:

```bash
$ ssh -i /path/to/privKey gradido@gddhost.tld
# This should log you in and allow you to use sudo commands, which will require the user's password
```

### Disable password root login via ssh

```bash
sudo sed -i -e '/^\(#\|\)PermitRootLogin/s/^.*$/PermitRootLogin no/' /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/ssh-hardening.conf
sudo sed -i '$a AllowUsers gradido' /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/ssh-hardening.conf
sudo /etc/init.d/ssh restart
```

### Test SSH Access only, no root ssh access

```bash
$ ssh gradido@gddhost.tld
# Will result in in either a passphrase request for your key or the message 'Permission denied (publickey)'
$ ssh -i /path/to/privKey root@gddhost.tld
# Will result in 'Permission denied (publickey)'
$ ssh -i /path/to/privKey gradido@gddhost.tld
# Will succeed after entering the correct keys passphrase (if any)
```

### Install `Gradido` code
```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/gradido/gradido.git --branch latest
```

### Adjust the values in `.env`

***!!! Attention !!!***

*Don't forget this step!
All your following installations in `install.sh` will fail!*

*Notes:*

- *`;` cannot be part of any value!*
- *The GitHub secret is created on GitHub in Settings -> Webhooks.*

#### Create `.env` and set values

```bash
cd ~/gradido/deployment/bare_metal
cp .env.dist .env
nano .env

# adjust values accordingly
```

### Run `install.sh` with branch name
***!!! Attention !!!***
Don't use this script if you have custom config in /etc/nginx/conf.d, because this script
will remove it and ln ../bare_metal/nginx/conf.d

```bash
cd ~/gradido/deployment/hetzner_cloud
sudo ./install.sh latest
```

I made a (german) video to show it to you (video is older, output will differ):

[![Video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/9h-55Si6bMk/hqdefault.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9h-55Si6bMk)

### Make yourself admin
- Create an account on your new gradido instance
- Click the link in the activation email
- go back to your ssh session and copy this command

```bash
sudo mysql -D gradido_community -e "insert into user_roles(user_id, role) values((select id from users order by id desc limit 1), 'ADMIN');"
```

- it will make last registered user admin
- login with you newly created user
- if you has a link to `Admin Area` it worked and you are admin

I made a (german) video to show it to you:

[![Video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/xVQ5t4MnLrE/hqdefault.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xVQ5t4MnLrE)

Commit message:

add validation info in .env.dist, update readme for release tag

deployment/hetzner_cloud/README.md, after:

# Migration
[Migration from 2.2.0 to 2.2.1](migration/2_2_0-2_2_1/README.md)

# Setup on Hetzner Cloud Server
Suggested OS:
Debian 12

For Hetzner Cloud Server a cloud config can be attached, which will be run before first start
https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/basic-cloud-config/de
https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/examples.html
You can use our [cloudConfig.yaml](./cloudConfig.yaml) but you must insert you own ssh public key, 
like this:
```yaml  
ssh_authorized_keys:
  - ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIAkLGbzbG7KIGfkssKJBkc/0EVAzQ/8vjvVHzNdxhK8J yourname
```

I made a (german) video to show it to you (video is older, cloudConfig.yaml differ):

[![Video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/fORK3Bt3lPw/hqdefault.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fORK3Bt3lPw)

## After Setup Cloud Server with cloudConfig.yaml
### setup your domain pointing on server ip address 
### login to your new server as root
```bash
ssh -i /path/to/privKey root@gddhost.tld
```

### Change default shell

```bash
chsh -s /bin/bash
chsh -s /bin/bash gradido
```

### Set password for user `gradido`

```bash
$ passwd gradido
# enter new password twice
```

### Switch to the new user

```bash
su gradido
```

### Test authentication via SSH

If you logout from the server you can test authentication:

```bash
$ ssh -i /path/to/privKey gradido@gddhost.tld
# This should log you in and allow you to use sudo commands, which will require the user's password
```

### Disable password root login via ssh

```bash
sudo sed -i -e '/^\(#\|\)PermitRootLogin/s/^.*$/PermitRootLogin no/' /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/ssh-hardening.conf
sudo sed -i '$a AllowUsers gradido' /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/ssh-hardening.conf
sudo /etc/init.d/ssh restart
```

### Test SSH Access only, no root ssh access

```bash
$ ssh gradido@gddhost.tld
# Will result in in either a passphrase request for your key or the message 'Permission denied (publickey)'
$ ssh -i /path/to/privKey root@gddhost.tld
# Will result in 'Permission denied (publickey)'
$ ssh -i /path/to/privKey gradido@gddhost.tld
# Will succeed after entering the correct keys passphrase (if any)
```

### Install `Gradido` code
`latest` is a tag pointing on last stable release
```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/gradido/gradido.git --branch latest --depth 1
```

### Adjust the values in `.env`

***!!! Attention !!!***

*Don't forget this step!
All your following installations in `install.sh` will fail!*

*Notes:*

- *`;` cannot be part of any value!*
- *The GitHub secret is created on GitHub in Settings -> Webhooks.*

#### Create `.env` and set values

```bash
cd ~/gradido/deployment/bare_metal
cp .env.dist .env
nano .env

# adjust values accordingly
```

### Run `install.sh` with branch or tag name
***!!! Attention !!!***
Don't use this script if you have custom config in /etc/nginx/conf.d, because this script
will remove it and ln ../bare_metal/nginx/conf.d

```bash
cd ~/gradido/deployment/hetzner_cloud
sudo ./install.sh latest
```

I made a (german) video to show it to you (video is older, output will differ):

[![Video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/9h-55Si6bMk/hqdefault.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9h-55Si6bMk)

### Make yourself admin
- Create an account on your new gradido instance
- Click the link in the activation email
- go back to your ssh session and copy this command

```bash
sudo mysql -D gradido_community -e "insert into user_roles(user_id, role) values((select id from users order by id desc limit 1), 'ADMIN');"
```

- it will make last registered user admin
- login with you newly created user
- if you has a link to `Admin Area` it worked and you are admin

I made a (german) video to show it to you:

[![Video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/xVQ5t4MnLrE/hqdefault.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xVQ5t4MnLrE)
